I am Peter Mohyla, born in 1596 in Moldavia,
current-day Romania. I am an Orthodox monk
and theologian of Moldavian origin who served as
metropolitan of Kyiv and who authored the Orthodox
Confession of the Catholic and Apostolic Eastern
Church. I reformed Slavic theological scholarship
and generally set doctrinal standards for Eastern
Orthodoxy that endured until the 19th century.
My family is from a royal Moldavian
lineage, I migrated to Polish Ukraine;
I was educated in Jesuit schools in Poland
and became proficient in Classical languages
and Latin Scholastic theology. I entered the
famous Monastery of the Caves at Kyiv in 1625
and was made it’s superior in a few years.
In 1633 I was elected metropolitan of Kyiv.
As a metropolitan, I made great efforts
to improve the education of my clergy and
laity at a time when both Roman Catholic and
Protestant missionaries were very active among
the Orthodox population of Poland and Ukraine.
I transformed the theological college of the Kyiv
monastery into a school of humanities and theology
and enlisted a Western-trained faculty for it. The
academy became the source of a theological revival
in the entire Russian Orthodox Church, and its
influence was felt in Russia until the end of the
19th century. I also obtained the Polish monarch’s
acknowledgment of the rights of the Orthodox
church in Polish territory, and I restored to
Orthodox control the churches and properties
that had been expropriated by Roman Catholics.
To bring order to Orthodox theology in its
two-fronted controversy with the Roman church
and with Protestant reformers, in 1640, I composed
The Orthodox Confession of Faith of the Eastern
Orthodox Church. It was approved by the four
Eastern patriarchs and was formally approved
at the Synod of Jerusalem in 1672. It remains
one of the primary outlines of Eastern Orthodox
doctrines as set forth in the refutation
of Roman Catholic and Protestant claims.
I bequeathed most of my estate to various church
institutions, mostly to the Kyivan Mohyla College.
I died in 1647 praying that faith will unite
the hearts of all humans across the world.